Hello, welcome again to the PBC Morning Dawn study group from Padmasami Lane, the Venerable
Kambaramiches Monastery in New York. Today we'll be doing the final chapter of their book,
The Buddhist Path, which is entitled Questions and Answers. It's chapter 21 and begins on
page 103. So thanks so much for joining us. We'll do our usual opening prayers and then
we'll begin the discussion. Thank you.
[Singing in Dzogchen]
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential, extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school. You keep alive and spread by the light
of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great Kimpo, I pray at your lotus feet. In the palace of the old
man Dhammadattu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the one who shows clearly
the Dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honourable Rukuru, glorious true teacher,
precious one, dwelling on the lotus seed and the crown of my head. Hold me with your great
kindness and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech and mind. [Singing in Dzogchen]
So again, we'll begin on page 103, the chapters question and answers. And since this whole
chapter is just a series of question and answers, that I'll just go through and summarize about
half of them. And then we'll go to our first topic of discussion. And then we'll summarize
the second half and then have our second topic of discussion. So beginning on 103, someone
asks the Rinpoche's, what do you mean by sentient beings? Rinpoche's reply, we are known as
sentient
beings because we have consciousness or mind. Specifically all sentient beings have the sixth,
seventh and eighth consciousnesses, otherwise known as dualistic consciousness,
Klesha afflicted emotion consciousness, and Elias storehouse consciousness. Among the six types of
sentient beings, human beings are highest because their minds are highly developed. Among human
beings, it is possible to develop our mental capacity further than we might expect, revealing
more and more of our inner wisdom and its power. Then there's another question where someone asks,
how are emotions related to mind? Rinpoche's reply, emotions are part of the relative level of mind
.
Mind can be divided into at least 52 mental events, including the negative emotions, which all come
from ignorance. Negative emotions keep the mind from remaining in the natural state. They come
from imbalanced, confused mind, which is always unstable and changing. The third question, if you
maintain a clear, empty mind for a month or a week, is that enlightenment? Rinpoche's reply, on the
relative level, all the meditation practice you do gets you closer to enlightenment. It purifies
negative emotions and reveals your natural goodness qualities, but don't expect to become
completely enlightened after a short period of time, like a month or a week. The following
question is, is meditation the only way to reach enlightenment? Rinpoche's reply, meditation is
very
important for realizing enlightenment, but we would not say that it is the only way. There are
different ways to meditate. The Buddha taught many techniques for reaching enlightenment, and they
're
all based on concentration and discipline. Then according to Dzogchen, to reach enlightenment,
we have to recognize the nature of our mind and maintain this recognition uninterruptedly. When
there is no longer any grasping that could possibly interrupt our abiding in the natural awareness,
then we're enlightened. Fifth question, do you have any advice for when you realize that you
have done something unkind? Rinpoche's reply, the very moment of recognizing a negative action of
thought is the first step, sorry, the very moment of recognizing a negative action or thought is
the
first step to purifying it. First you recognize it, which puts your mind into a greater balance and
reduces the tendency of that act to happen again. Then you consciously decide not to act that way
again. In addition, if you've hurt others you can do meditation practices for them related to the
six paramitas. The first four paramitas increase the positive energy or merit for yourself and
others. Concentration tames your mind, and wisdom reveals the inherent absolute nature of
everything.
In Vajrayana, all of these six paramita practices are combined in a practice like a meditation on
Vajrasattva, which is particularly helpful to purify negative emotions. Then someone asks,
an additional question of Kenshin Pauld and Sherib Rinpoche. Kenshin Rinpoche, they asked
him to describe his training, and this is on pages 105 and 107, and since the answer is a bit long,
I kind of just really quickly summarized it. So I said briefly, Kenshin Rinpoche started learning
to read at the age of four. At the age of seven, he began learning and memorizing certain rituals.
From the ages of seven to twelve, he studied history and biographies of the Buddha and Guru
Padmasambhava. From ages of 12 to 21, he went to Riruche monastery to learn the five major
and minor sciences. So the five major and five minor sciences, including Karabhava, Mahayana,
Vashriyana, and Dzogchen. At the age of 21, after his studies at Riruche completed, he fled Tibet
with his family. In 1965, Kenshin Rinpoche was asked by his fullness, Dzogchen Rinpoche, to attend
a conference of Tibetan scholars and masters for one year, to keep the lineages and cultures of
Tibet alive. In 1967, Kenshin Rinpoche helped establish the Institute of Tibetan Studies.
And then from 1967 to 1983, Kenshin Rinpoche served as the head abbot and main professor
of the Nyingma Department of the Institute. He first came to the USA in 1980 and returned to live
in the United States in 1983 onwards. Then an additional question was about when people begin
meditating in Tibet, what age? In Riruche's reply, in the Nyingma school, students usually start
meditating around the age of 12 when they're also began learning the major sciences. So those are
summary questions about the first half of the chapter. I think now Anna will read our first
question of discussion. This question is on page 108, last two paragraphs, page 109, first three
paragraphs. Question is, what do you mean by the primordial nature of the mind? And then Kimbo's
reply, in the higher levels of the Buddhist teaching, it is said that all the phenomena
we perceive are simply displays of the mind. The deepest nature of the mind, the enlightened mind,
is known as primordial awareness. All mental activities arise from primordial awareness.
And if we recognize that, then enlightenment manifests in every thought and perception.
If we do not recognize it, then thoughts and perceptions continue to be obstructions
that cause suffering. In order to awaken inner wisdom, it is necessary to break down the
dualistic concepts that posit an internal subject and external objects. Typically, we perceive
ourselves as individual subjects who experience objects that are separate from the self.
We feel distance and make distinctions between the two. The feeling of being a subject who relates
to objects is simply a notion of the mind. The mind alone creates the concept of a separate self.
Once that conception is formed, we hold on to it, although from the primordial point of view,
the self does not really exist. To overcome duality, it is necessary to cultivate the
equanimity that encompasses both subject and object. Practicing love and compassion is
extremely helpful in terms of understanding the inseparability of outer and inner reality.
To recognize everything as the perfect activity of the enlightened mind
is to realize the primordial nature of pure awareness. Sometimes this is called
ripa. Ripa is the innermost true nature of the mind, our awareness which is fresh,
uncom pounded, and very open. Along with emptiness, ripa contains clarity, love and kindness,
wisdom, and skillful means. Meditation reveals this awareness that we all have.
To recognize the movements of the mind as the display of wisdom and to let thoughts arise
and go their own way is called the natural flow of awareness.
To start us off, I have a word question and that is just why do they refer to this as primordial
nature? They don't actually explain the primordial quality in their answer. I just wonder
just as a jumping off place to discuss why are they calling it the primordial nature of the mind?
Well, it seems like they do mention in the question, like they say, to recognize everything
as the perfect activity of the enlightened mind is to realize the primordial nature of pure
awareness. So it seems like they're talking about pure awareness throughout, but also
they seem like they're emphasizing how the absence of the self, how there is no subject,
how the sense of self is just imputed but doesn't actually exist. So I guess that
kind of points in the direction of, you know, so if what we, in other words, if what we take to be,
if what we always take to exist, you know, our story like we were talking about I think earlier
today, I am this and you are that and everything is like this because that's the way I see things,
you know, that if we take that as our point of departure then we're not really, you know,
uprooting the, you know, that basic fundamental idea that it's a display of primordial nature
instead of just that's the way it is.
You are like the idea that what you're talking about here is original nature and then talking
about the self, it's almost like just something that's added on top, it's like a fabrication,
a creation later, something like that.
Which is such a radical notion in terms of reality, the way that it seems like,
at least I know I experience it that way most of the time.
Yeah, I remember one time having a conversation with my son when he was young, he was about
11 or something and I was talking to him about egolessness and he said,
sorry mom, I'm right here, I exist, I'm sorry you can't tell me that I don't, you know,
that's just how we are, you know, that's our natural point of view,
not maybe not natural point of view, maybe that's the wrong word but...
Even in Western philosophy I think it's that same way, like that Cartesian bedrock of Western
philosophy, I think therefore I am or I doubt therefore I am, it's that sense of I or ego that
me as being here doing an activity, thinking, doubting, that's undoubtable.
Because I doubt I must be here to doubt, I mean because I see things I must be here to see things
and if there are objects to look at there has to be a looker, it's like totally the bedrock of
Western philosophy and it's like the, that is like the root of our duality mind or of the mistake,
I mean that in Buddhism they say that's the fundamental mistake, that gut level assumption
that there is this I or this me that's here at the center of things, at the center of experience
or something and that everything else is kind of on the periphery or than being related to.
I think definitely so primordial is relating to just how they talk about in this, in their answer
that before our awareness splits itself into a sense of perceiver and perceived or I and what's
not me, that subject object is primordial is like how the mind is before it becomes dualistic.
Yeah and also just like in terms of trying to really kind of understand what would be an
alternative view to the sense of being a separate self with objects is what they're saying here
about that everything is actually a display of the mind it's like that notion of the radiance
of the mind that that's what this is that you know that we have awareness and somehow we,
there's some sort of interpretation of it as being an agent that there's an agent here who is aware
and is therefore acting and so forth you know but that it in a sense you could just see it as
awareness and awareness is manifestations of thoughts and emotions and perceptions and
sensations and you know that's that's what it is it's just the display of primordial awareness.
What's that um the way they describe it it's like the rippa and then sol
comes oh rises from rippa or is that right and then wind moves that and then it and then our
one of our consciousnesses one of our consciousnesses are like our I can't remember you know do you
know what I'm talking about it was in fundamental mind we talked about it you know this process of
how we concretize yeah how the display happens yeah and I was just thinking about that when you
said that yeah yeah and then also sorry I just yeah sure rippa I've heard you know here it seems
like
rippa I know is awareness right like fresh naked awareness sort of or primordial
awareness primordial awareness yeah yeah but that yeah it's realized sometimes this is called rippa
so they but in so I guess beside rippa it definitely seems like they're talking about
fundamental mind I mean nook sim right so I just thought that was interesting because they sort of
they just they talked about it in terms of rippa I guess more so I'm just curious
why maybe I don't know why what why they're calling it rippa
yeah or I guess I mean they're not yeah I don't know I think you know it seems like
you know what the people said many teachers too there's all these different names
yeah just all kinds of different names for for wisdom or awareness or fundamental mind
or original mind or you know it's just like dharmakaya and what just goes on and on and on
there's so many you know they're just because I think that you know certain words connect with
certain people you know so you hear a certain thing but you don't hear other things and so
then that's why they repeat so much you know every once in a while it gets through to someone
yes they say in a slightly different way because they're also talking about would you say I don't
know but ground luminosity as well would you say that I would say that same thing yeah
pure awareness yeah we can put all these on the vocabulary
and on the back there's a definition of primordial nature and it lists some of these synonyms
Buddha nature absolute bodhicitta, prajna-karmita, mother of all the buddhas, medyamaka, mahamudra,
rikpa, these are all synonyms for that what is it nyawokadak or primordial nature
I think a beautiful part of this like in Rupache's reply here when they're talking about the radi
ating
qualities of natural awareness it very it's very distinct from the fundamental the foundational
buddhism view of no self so if this is not just saying that there it's not just saying it's
it's it's without any rigidity or any fixity or when you look for it there's nothing fixed there
so that's no self we feel like I am me and it's I'm continuing and it's I have these
real essential characteristics and that's what I am and it's the fix it's the rigidity of that
feeling of in other concepts we kind of cover it that there is they say that's not there that's
that self in that way is not there no self there's no rigid absolute self but there is a relative
self there's a relative apprehension of subjectivity awareness and so it's not just a total
negation saying absolute self no there's not absolute self because in the medyamaka or middle
way teachings they barely clearly go beyond both of these poles self and no self there's this
awareness or primordial nature and so then you that's why you can highlight all these radiating
qualities these natural expressions and displays because you say a display of what because a
display of no self how can nothingness display and that's what they're saying they're not saying
it's nothingness they're saying it's it's not that fixed concrete unchanging independent sense of
me
that's there that's not there it's totally relative it's totally relational and so then
I think that's a big point for me it's relative self is there right like there's a functioning
self yeah yeah we do function as a separate organism we just do
that's why if a Buddha attains enlightenment doesn't mean all beings attain enlightenment
or because our teachers might reach a certain level of realization doesn't mean that we reach
that spontaneously that same level yeah that's what I was thinking to that important point
but just like if you if visually in my mind if I think that like what is subject and object at the
most basic level like they were saying here there's something here and then there's everything else
in existence that's not this something here and that this it just it just necessarily posits
something as independent singular and permanent you know like those those aspects like because
there's this little finite body here and then there's this infinite everything else and they're
totally separate you know and it's just like even though we might have that sense you know but it's
like if you think about it it's just like it's just such a foolish view you know even at the level
of
like even at the strictly material level of oxygen exchange and molecules and electromagnetic
fields
and we came from our parents who came from their parents who came from their parents who came from
their parents like just keeps going you know so to think that like all of a sudden we're here
at this moment and it's like it's just this me and then there's everything else not me
it's just like even just thinking about that it doesn't even make sense you know even our language
our culture our our worldviews those are all embedded in all these big cultural contexts
like a deer doesn't perceive itself walking through the universe the way we perceive
ourselves walking through the universe or the way a Buddha perceives everything as a display
so then i have a question for you then so we're saying there is not a fixed sense of absolute
self but there is a relative sense of self but here they're describing primordial nature as being
uncompounded so how does uncompounded nature like how does that fit with having a relative nature
too
so that's a question how can it be uncompounded and relative i think even when you look at the
sky you can see things fly through it and that's kind of a gross example you know even if there's
that aspect that is you know spacious vast luminosity you know all these beautiful qualities
there's still those those aspects that that kind of rise within it and you know if you particularly
with a human consciousness and faculty that there's an arc that gets traced you know and that
that you can you can see because i mean just because you know everything um you know doesn't
have a fixed self doesn't mean that that stops causes and conditions you know you're looking at
that interdependence you're looking at how those things arise together still and so but even you
know looking at that you still recognize okay you know yeah it arises together but even that
still has that aspect where it came it's going to leave but they say the primordial nature's
it doesn't but that's what i'm saying the relative quality comes and leaves but okay it's still at
that base there's still that awareness there's still that luminosity where's that base why are
you not going to find it it's the cloud this is the eye cloud i can't say that ever infinite eye
cloud
it's in our heart right in light but isn't it still alive oh no i mean go ahead has the basis of
you know pure pure alive or just the of those eight consciousnesses pure alive that there's
movement or primordial nature that the nature of awareness is awareness i mean there's experience
there is a way awareness happens or whatever you know beyond words but then as movement of that
the the the different displays arise spontaneously from that and we can't do this real or take the
most concept well what do you do or not i think that happens you know that you could gradually
train so that you don't because not everything has sentience and see that's why i've always been
a little confused on this because it seems like i know that the teachings say uncompounded but
then they say wind but they say that the wind is it's always associated with awareness there's
subtle wind so it seems like that subtle wind is material movement it's movement like a subtle
they say it's like a subtle form it's like this i think they describe it more as speech if you
have body speech in mind mind is this uncompounded intangible limitless awareness and speech is
this
arising quality or this knowing quality and then as it distills more and more and more tangible
forms you have body so these more outer appearing objects it's appearances or objects tangible
things that can be blocked or that block so wind is more that intangible it's like a semi-form
not mind not body it's in between it's form or semi it's like semi-form or semi-mind or something
and so it's still it doesn't i mean as i've said before it's a subtle if you had a class that is
either being subjective awareness an objective subject an object it's like a really really
subtle object but the object isn't a concrete entity it's movement so you can't say movement
is a thing movement is what things do what they appear to do so where is uncompounded like
it can't be grabbed it can't be pinpointed that's the crazy thing it is crazy so crazy
isn't it it's so fantastic in terms of like that we were talking the other time about mystery and
sort of magic i mean it's so magical isn't it that all this is appearing and yet it really
doesn't have any true existence i mean it's incredible it's totally amazing you know that
whole thing of the things because we do have this tendency to think that well either things exist
or they don't exist do you know that you have to actually look into it do you know what i mean
really really look and then you can start to see that like what you were talking about with
relative level that it's this is the nature it's that there is this uncompounded nature
that is manifesting as all these relative things interesting too because particularly when you look
at the relative it couldn't manifest without that absolute quality if there was an inherent quality
to it there'd be no change they wouldn't be able to you know arise and fall you know because there
would be that that status so you really start to see that indivisibility yes it's really it's just
a mystery like you have the notion of the three kyas are always there together you know so you
have that dharmakaya uncompounded you know awareness emptiness quality that's there
within all the compounded stuff is there too it's really it's very mysterious yeah it's really
and then you think about in the in the teachings you know how to say beginning with like we have
been experiencing this display forever that's what the teachings say you know beyond concept
but i mean even in terms of past lives how many you know like the buddha oh one time i was this
and that and this and that forever you know i mean it just keeps going he said even i look back and
didn't see a beginning you know but just that notion of the continuity of the seeming in the
world of time the seeming just continuity of experience it just keeps going like i think i
mentioned one other time like robert throughman said when he translated the tibetan book of the
dead he said oh i under i discovered something that maybe everybody else already knows there
are no dead people we're all dead yeah don't freak out everybody it's like a dream you've heard
this
before we all have a dream a bubble an illusion a movie a hallucination or we're all dead
but even the idea of being a person is yeah not yeah like if there's no life if life doesn't
really have a you know a solidity then neither does death then neither does this space in between
life and death it's just it is so magical you know you can see how when somebody wakes up i
i think it is it seems like an appropriate metaphor like waking from a dream yes because
it's like to really see the dream and know that the dream happened quote unquote but that it's
just like not the way you think it did you know not the must be so interesting not in your box
it's not just your box version the way you thought was happening there's a lot more was actually
involved yeah oh i just like to go back to just one other thing and some of what you were saying
like i can't remember exactly where it filled it fit in but well just this the sense too that what
we really have to do overcome it the self and have kind of almost like the self won't withstand
analysis but that it's just so important to really look into things whether you're doing
it through an analytical way or trying to do it direct perception in your experience while you're
meditating but it seems like so much of what the the buddhist approach is is looking you know
really looking into things you know really uh coming to know for yourself the way things are
in terms of just all these things that you were saying that it's such a kind of crazy thing to
even think that you could be totally separate and everything else is out there but if you really
looked into it then you would realize it isn't that way but just the key thing of actually really
looking i love that i know in the minyafika book it talks about that you know just the self
doesn't stand up against real analysis you know you know yeah i love that yeah and that being a
definition of even relative truth right or that which is seemed solid with only when not examined
and that also puts like the impetus or it's really on oneself because i mean we have the
responsibility and the opportunity to investigate like it totally i mean just like we've heard so
much that the buddha said the buddha can only show us the path but we have to walk it and it
really means that like a great master can't make us realize what we are like they can set up so
many
wonderful auspicious conditions like an empowerment ceremony or like a some a direct kind of just
how
they can communicate with such skillful means but when it comes down to it our awareness has to
recognize itself and that that's such a open door opportunity for all of us but it's also a great
responsibility because that's we have this sense that although as individualistic as we might want
to be it's i'm the creative force i'm the one that's going to do all this that no one's ever done
or something all that you go with trip thing that so much of what we're trying to do is avoid
responsibility when it comes down to it i want to do what i want but if something breaks like it
wasn't me we're easy to blame or to move it but we want to take the full like the the credit we
want the credit but not the blame and so it's interesting that opportunity that investigation
poses or that like any scientific really thorough analysis poses that we have to look if we don't
look it's our fault if we do look we get to reap the benefits of doing so too
and especially once you hear the teachings and have access to the teachings and a teacher
then this really is like here's a map you know you're trying to get to florida here's a map
if you're trying to get an enlightenment here's also a map just go this way and then follow this
when you have this take a ride you know it's just like it's so like if you followed it you'll get
there but you have to follow it which you have to follow it yeah yeah yeah yeah i know it deals
with effort i just read that so that's a joyful part yeah joyful people go to the next i'll
summarize a few of these other questions and i think lojo will read this other final talking
point is that right um so the next um question someone asked the verbiage is what is the role
of faith in attaining liberation they reply in buddhism faith is a combination of confidence
and devotion you are confident in the truth of the teachings after hearing and studying them
critically investigating them and applying them in your life to directly experience their validity
liberation means when you have completely removed all of your suffering and confusion
this happens within your own mind when you eliminate all of your mistaken ideas and habits
and have complete power over your own mind
so the next question is someone asked was the historical buddha buddha shakimuni the
first person to become enlightened nirimache's reply no buddha shakimuni was not the first
enlightened being according to the mahayana teachings of the buddha the buddha taught that
there are thousands of mill i mean countless buddhas in every direction during our universe
buddha shakimuni was the fourth buddha to reveal the complete path to enlightenment
every sentient being has buddha nature the seeder potential for enlightenment the absolute first
buddha is the primordial nature of one's own mind which is sometimes called the true nature prim
ordial
buddha of the original buddha then another question is someone asks is mindfulness the primordial
nature rheumache's reply mindfulness is a technique that helps us discover the primordial nature
with effort we continually or continuously apply mindfulness of our body speech and mind which
helps us recognize their pure nature once we recognize their true nature effortless mindfulness
naturally arises from the mind just like sun beams naturally radiate from the sun
so with fabricated intentional mindfulness we discover our primordial nature which naturally
arises as the limitless goodness qualities like natural spontaneous mindfulness that sees the
true nature of oneself and all phenomena then the final question of the chapter i think lojo is
going
to read okay what is the relationship between zogchen and bodhichitta the zogchen teachings are
the highest teachings of buddha shakimuni from the zogchen point of view everything is totally
equal
in one profound state without duality and distinctions zogchen is the ultimate view
of the true nature of mind which includes love and compassion when we practice zogchen we develop
compassion and loving kindness zogchen practice cannot be separated from bodhichitta practice
we cannot ignore relative bodhichitta and accept absolute bodhichitta both are part of our true
nature and both are part of zogchen for this reason before we meditate we take refuge and
develop the flan of bodhichitta after we meditate we dedicate the merit to all sentient beings
whenever we practice or do any kind of beneficial activity we should not cling to it
at the absolute level everything is totally pure and perfect in great emptiness from that point of
view we are completely free from all dualistic concepts and clinging every person has the
enlightened nature but to actualize that nature is necessary to practice bodhichitta the love
and compassion for all beings bodhichitta is universally precious everybody appreciates it
and everybody has the potential to develop it enlightenment is completely dependent upon
developing compassion for all beings the wish to obtain enlightenment for the benefit of others
is the essence of both the maha yana and vajrayana paths when we develop inner wisdom we can take
care of all sentient beings and radiate compassion and kindness throughout the universe we can
discover the true nature of the mind and the entire world in order to be able to do this meditation
practice is very important bodhichitta is the root or the seed from which enlightenment develops
bodhichitta is not found externally but is within your own mind although all of us have experienced
love and compassion these qualities need to be developed further page 100 last paragraph page 101
the first and second paragraphs beautiful it's like a clear bell just like it's just like
pure and clear and clean and pervasive and just uplifting to hear and soothing and
it's really beautiful it's just i mean there's so much they said there but one thing i know is just
sorry um just just looking at the whole it seemed like he talked about bodhichitta a little bit
more
looking at it seem like so what do you mean because i said zuchen is is bodhichitta
so then how did they talk about bodhichitta more than zuchen i don't know it just seems
like it's a difference or something you're saying well i guess i don't know just from my own
you know filter it seemed like maybe you was talking about bodhichitta
are you thinking of zuchen as maybe a technique
just a word yeah or maybe maybe he just didn't want to um talk about zuchen maybe wanted to talk
more about bodhichitta maybe um maybe because a lot of people like to go to zuchen you know
and maybe you maybe wanted to take a bodhichitta ladder i don't know i don't know really but it
just seemed like he talked about bodhichitta a little bit more like you know because saying
you know it is it it does it is it does cause enlightenment yeah i think it's like maybe we
have a ten most people have a tendency to think of zuchen as absolute bodhichitta and what he's
trying to do here is kind of emphasize that the relative is really a part of it too yeah he said
both yeah and so exactly how would somebody say that the relative bodhichitta really fits into
the zuchen it is the natural rating radiating qualities of awareness when your mind is totally
balanced and not grasping in any mistaken way that that it's knowing radiating qualities are
naturally loving compassionate just like they said at the end of this first um sorry this first
section sometimes this is called rigpo rigpo is the innermost true nature of the mind our awareness
which is fresh uncom pounded and very open so that's the absolute bodhichitta part then they
say along with emptiness rigpo contains clarity loving kindness wisdom and skillful means the
relative bodhichitta part always together yeah yeah just in terms of what dylan was pointing out
i don't think it's that they didn't want to talk about zuchen here i think they've already talked
about it so much in this book that they were emphasizing more how does the bodhichitta part
fit in so yeah that's good that's very helpful in terms of seeing that that you know previous
discussion of zuchen is broken down into these two aspects so relative and absolute bodhichitta
one of the reasons reasons too we might have been articulating more about bodhichitta it's
really particularly the ways he's talked about you know going back through the the paragraphs
it really becomes the the fuel not only the motivation but the practice of you know it's
really that foundation path and realization you know so it's if you if you have that that
motivation of that bodhichitta that's a you know a lot of the zuchen is is already there you know
i mean but i'm not just saying like you know oh i i have a nice hallmark feeling kind of you know
like i'm gonna give someone a card to you know as much as you know like that real you know that
that aspiration to benefit all 17 beings and all of your actions all your words you know all your
thoughts just arising for the you know that that real desire to liberate with you know with with
true wisdom true compassion you know yeah i mean like he says the i mean i mean he's talking about
ninja but yeah as it being the launch pad you know to maybe these higher states if you see it from
that way and even nundra i mean i think it's really good just just to emphasize this i'm so
glad which is did this and it's so profound that just really there's always a relative aspect and
an absolute aspect like you mentioned nundra nundra has an outer inner innermost and absolute
level of each section there's always an absolute part there's always a relative part that relative
part always has degrees of subtlety the outermost relative the innermost relative and then
absolutely
like totally beyond and limitless so we have certain things we hear that we tend to want
we hold them in a certain way because they seem like they're like rungs on the ladder that were
used to finally be free you know but like i mean that's just seen when we're holding onto things
more as if we're going to eventually get to a place that's not holding and then there's just
going to not be things anymore but they're really clearly saying that those radiating qualities
come even more even i mean it's even like when they describe in the tantra it's just like
the intricacy if they're on the relative level the view of the buddha they're on their omniscience
that relative side of the omniscience and their absolute side the relative side sees endless
degrees of subtlety both subtly small and subtly big and it's all yeah seen purely without mistake
i mean you see so much more of the relative from the enlightened perspective according to the
tantras and the sutras i mean the amitabhas pure land and all these describe that quite a lot in
the sutras too it's just good that it's emphasizing that that absolute realization includes
everything
even it says it includes duality here like uh on the absolute level it says from that viewpoint
we're completely free from all dualistic concepts and clinging so free from dualistic concepts and
clinging but these concepts happen when we cling but duality or like having a sense of objects out
there or maybe the out there is not there but a sense of objects and subject is still there for
enlightened beings let it really clearly say it there's dharmakat there's a you say that's why
there's pure relative truth and absolute truth the pure relative truth is the appearances the
radiating qualities so it's never that it all just fizzles into blankness you know and i think too
like along the same lines when sometimes it seems like we have an idea of an enlightened being
as someone who's just like an uncaring removed always still never smiling you know what i mean
yeah he's like somewhere else like in this state of like you know total nothingness almost and we
it seems like we have that you have zogchen too but then you think of like tara all these different
buddhas they always say that what is the nature of those loving compassionate of course they know
sentient beings don't really exist as like a solid sentient being but the sentient beings that don
't
exist think they exist so you know what i mean it's just like i i think it's so important like
what you were saying too and that level of like so many of these teachers like they say when they
talk about their teachers or when they think of bodhicitta or when they think of suffering or
sentient being they just start crying the highest masters of male and female there's so many if you
read any bio all these biographies does that mean that they're diluted and have no you know like
don't understand the view of zogchen or does that mean and that that outreaching qualities of their
understanding is just like because they know there's no samsara you know yeah and then practice
more
yeah and they study more yeah and they do more things i mean really and they're just totally
aligned you know they're just like they're in a dream they made the dream into a perfect dream
but other people in their dream don't see it that way from their side so it's just so important
because otherwise you think it's just you can use practice to escape you can just use the dharma to
escape i think it's a big escape escape from experience escape from feeling and all these
things and it's just like towing not the right way to use the dharma dharma goes deeper inward you
know it doesn't try to like hold everything at a distance you know temporarily we do like
lessen distraction yeah so we just because that's practical we need to not be around all the stuff
that causes us to strongly habitually react so we temporarily do remove or distance or so we're not
just immediately jumping with our habits but like it's always always in the end you come you know
you go back into the marketplace or whatever there's that re-engagement in a pure clear wisdom way
like it's always makes you more engaged i mean just from the examples like you said life stories
and the and also the philosophy of it is it it agrees and the whole form is emptiness and
emptiness is foreign thing it doesn't matter how high a realization is that manifests
in a relational way you know for a union of the kind it's like ann was saying it's not just some
you know that's why the dharmakai rubakai the rubakai is the expressive
appearing aspect of the dharmakai
appearance and emptiness all right ross you got anything to say well i think it may be about time
yeah there's still time might be time but there's still time so this has really been like the this
is so this is the final discussion it's the final chapter of this book and the buddhist path by the
venerable kenba rama chase and so really of course thanks everyone here and he's everyone who's
been
here too for really participating and really this has been kenba san rama chase request for this to
happen and it's like really our privilege to be able to come together and do this and also for
everyone to join and share and look look at these great wisdom teachings of our our very precious
masters i mean it's really very very rich and very wonderful we're really so fortunate we're glad
everyone joined we've just this will continue so yeah thank you
is
by this merit may all obtain omniscience may it defeat the enemy wrongdoing from the stormy
waves of earth all day sickness and death from the ocean of samsara may have free hall beams
the precious bodhicitta and those without it may have been generated and those who have it may
have never diminished but always continue increasing